---
layout: post
title:  "Carpe Diem"
categories: 
tags:
---

My eyes are opening. I am waking up in London at 8:00 AM. Rise and shine. I feel excited, another day to look forward to. Passing by the Tate Modern, which looks anything but modern and walking over the Millennium Bridge, a rare modern gem in an ancient city. Strolling along the Thames to university and taking in all the wonders that the city has to offer. The Gherkin Skyscraper, London Tower Bridge, St. Paul’s Cathedral, the London Eye, the House of Parliament and the Big Ben. The old and medieval character of the city becomes immediately apparent. The traffic seems chaotic, the big red busses that are everywhere give the city its color, and hackney carriages, a fancy word for cabs, look as if they are taken out of an American movie from the 1920s. Walking through Middle Temple, an Inns Court for future barristers, I notice the old buildings and fountain courts, which remind me of Oxford, where I had been a few weeks ago to visit a friend. Turning left on Fleet Street, passing by Sweeney Todd’s fictional barber shop, crossing the street and walking over to the Royal Courts of Justice.

When I finally arrive on Houghton Street, where the London School of Economics is located, I realize how much history I just bypassed on my way to school. I am right in the heart of London amidst students that come to study here from all over the world. The environment feels intimidating, but also challenging. My impression is that most students are hard-working and competitive. I hear students talking in different languages. It feels like I am in New York at the United Nations. While the weather in London seems to be anything but diverse, the students are very cosmopolitan indeed. On campus I buy a newspaper and a coffee. I recognize some familiar faces, and have a brief chat about what is going on in the world. I am running late so I have to leave. I quietly sneak into the Peacock theatre and listen to the lecture on security analysis. After the lecture I walk out of the theatre and head over to the Shaw library, a tiny comfy library which I reckon they would have at Columbia or Harvard. When I enter the small library, which is garnished with old pictures, a girl is playing Claire de Lune on a piano, which reminds me of New York for some reason. I think for a moment about all the good memories I made there. I miss America. I continue reading the newspaper, but leave after a while to meet some friends for lunch. At the restaurant, everybody has an interesting story and background to share.

We talk about London and the peculiarities of British life such as traffic being on the other side, which one has to get used to. Everybody comes from a different background, so everyone has an interesting story to share. After lunch, we walk back to campus and towards the main library. The library has a remarkable interior design. The staircases go spirally upwards. The library itself with its sheer vastness of books is impressive and it feels like I am in an Amazon warehouse where I can get every book right away. However the library is not only a place to study but also a place to socialize. I take the elevator to the third floor, fill up my water bottle and go to the quiet study area to read books and think. Having another lecture coming up in a few hours, I need to get some readings done. Every Friday afternoon, Niall Ferguson is teaching a lecture on Western Ascendancy, which I am really looking forward to. After the lecture I meet some friends for dinner and then take the tube to Victoria station to see Wicked, an acclaimed musical. I met two girls from Brazil I know and we have a great time. After the show I take the tube back home and get off at St. Paul’s station. I am back to where I started my day, but now its dark and the streets are empty. Another walk over Millennium bridge and then I am home. While crossing the bridge, I hear the bell of St. Paul’s cathedral ringing. I stop for a moment and look out into the distance onto London Tower Bridge.

I take some time to reflect on what I experienced and learned over the past few months. It’s been about seven months since I left New York and almost a year when I made the decision to study abroad. I still remember when I was accepted. It was a sunny spring day in April and I was in my apartment in New York. I was thrilled. Studying abroad is challenging and adventurous because it is full of uncertainties. It means leaving an comfortable environment and exchanging it for a new one which feels at first strange and unfamiliar. Studying in London required me to overcome obstacles and adapt. Although financially and psychologically a challenge, it was very rewarding after all. The hardest part is always the beginning, but one adapts and grows as a person.

I learned more what I want and who I am, and as a result became less upset by things and other people. Studying abroad also strengthened my character and further developed my personality. I had the chance of meeting so many interesting people from all different walks of life, and it not only helped me to understand myself better but also the world around me. While still reflecting on my time in London, I begin to slowly make my way over the other side of the bridge. When I finally arrive home, it is already after midnight. I am tired and go to bed. I made the most out of my day. Carpe Diem. My eyes are closing.
