---
layout: post
title:  "Religious conflicts contributed more to the birth of the modern nation-state than the military and economic consequences of new forms of warfare’. Discuss with reference to 16th and 17th century Europe"
categories: 
tags: 
---

GV265 – States, Nations, and Empires 2012 Essay

In this essay I will argue that religious conflicts contributed more to the birth of the modern nation-state than the military and economic consequences of new forms of warfare. The birth of the modern nation-state was a multifaceted event with different origins. The military and economic consequences of new forms of warfare without doubt also contributed to the creation of the modern nation-state, but this essay will show why the religious conflicts in the sixteenth and seventeenth century were primary and the military and economic factors were secondary. First I will focus on the Reformation and show how it led people to realize an energy of religious dissatisfaction. Then I will briefly explain how the religious conflicts led to the Thirty Years War. Finally I will demonstrate a correlation between the ceasing of religious conflicts and the ascent of nation-states by focusing on the Treaty of Westphalia. In fact, the birth of the nation-state was dependent upon the absence of religious warfare and had the period, in which states routinely invaded one another on account of religious conflicts to impose one’s own religious order within that state, not ended in 1648, the modern nation- state could not have been born.

The military and economic consequences of new forms of warfare were secondary because these factors did not lead states to be sovereign. First, we need to define what a nation-state is in the modern sense. According to the Oxford Dictionary, a nation-state is a sovereign state whose citizens or subjects are relatively homogenous in factors such as language or common descent.  One of the major elements of the modern nation-state is thus the concept of sovereignty. According to the same dictionary, sovereignty means the authority of a state to govern itself or another state. To know what element contributed more to the birth of the modern nation-state, we must understand how sovereignty was derived and where and when it originated. If we assume that the origin of sovereignty lay in the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648, then it is hard to defend the argument that military and economic consequences of new forms of warfare were essential for the creation of the nation-state. For Tilly, territorial nation states with centralized bureaucracies, taxation systems, and extensive armies became necessary for survival because of technological innovations, increasing external threats, rising war costs and with that the need for standardized armies. For Seabright, there was an increased need for government because of the shift from a nomadic, hunter and gatherer society to a sedentary, agricultural society which needed protection.  In fact they give good answers to the question why the territorial national state become dominant, but it cannot be a compelling answer to the question of what was the essential factor in the creation of the modern nation-state. Although important, military and economics cannot be regarded as the essential factors. In addition, there were elements of sovereignty before the Treaty of Westphalia when the Peace Treaty of Augsburg was ratified in 1555. “It [The Treaty] stipulated that the religion of the ruler of each of the empire’s states would be the religion of the state. (cuius region, eius, religio).” However, the treaty was not established and did not trigger the birth of the nation-state. Therefore, we need to understand what led to the Treaty of Westphalia, and what was different in 1648, and how the concept of sovereignty was born. Only then do we know what factors contributed more to the birth of the modern nation-state.

The Reformation in the 16th century was the key event that triggered religious conflicts in Europe, yet these conflicts changed the political landscape and indirectly provided the seeds for the birth of the modern nation-state. The Protestant and Catholic Reformation in the 16th century shattered the religious unity in Europe and the state slowly began to assert its authority over the church. Politics was to become autonomous and governed away from religious beliefs. Darwin points out that the Reformation was “a spirit of rebellion, intolerance, and dogmatism which threatened to make occident polities ungovernable.” , while Gunn recognizes that “the most influential variable in the development of sixteenth- century states was the impact of religious change.”  When looking at the distribution of power prior to the Protestant and Catholic Reformation, it becomes even more apparent what religious conflicts contributed to the modern nation-state. For centuries the Catholic church was an economic resource and the secular power was dependent upon the papacy. Kings and emperors called divine blessing on their rule. The church held vast land that it taxed and defended, which increased the Church’s wealth, but also slowly alienated people away from the Church. In fact people resented the enormous wealth of the Church, which was visible for people living in cities and they further resented the clergy which had privileges in terms of tax and civil responsibility exemptions. Since priests and bishops emphasized rituals and membership of the church, people welcomed a religious alternative. What further made the spread of the Protestant Reformation, led by Luther and Calvin, possible was the invention of the printing press, perfected by Gutenberg in the 15th century. In fact, the printing press increased literacy rates. The end result of the Reformation is multifold, but cannot be underestimated in its impact on laying the foundation for the nation-state. While the Reformation split Europe, which ultimately led to the Thirty Years War, it achieved something quite important, as well. It gave people a choice and a channel to challenge the authority of the state. While people had to conform to the standards of the Church in the past, people were now given an alternative with Lutheranism and Calvinism. Figgis indicates that Luther’s lasting contribution to politics are “the unity and universality and essential rightness of the sovereign territorial state, and the denial of every extra-territorial or independent communal form of life.” In effect, Luther’s theology stripped the Catholic church of its ecclesiastical and temporal powers. Besides in the case of Henry VIII, the English ruler not only rejected papal claims to power but asserted his own authority over them. In The Protestant Ethic and Spirit of Capitalism, Max Weber ascribes the Reformation and the Protestant Work Ethic as forces that contributed to the development of capitalism. This shows that religious dissatisfaction, which led to religious conflicts and the Reformation in particular, led to capitalistic developments such as trade, free enterprise and therefore links the Reformation indirectly through capitalism to the modern nation-state.

The Thirty Years War, which began at the beginning of the 16th century on account of the Protestant and Catholic Reformations, led to the Treaty of Westphalia when the war ended in 1648. This reveals that every adversity can also bring a seed of an equal opportunity to improve the situation. In the same way as World War II was a horrible moment for Europe and humanity in general, it nonetheless brought the opportunity to learn from the mistakes of the past and improve the political system in the future. However this does not justify the horrendous acts of crime and manslaughter that were committed in both WWII and The Thirty Years War, and neither does it imply that the wars were in any way good. What starts as a war between Protestants and Catholics, ends up as war that is fought between brutal mercenaries who kill the population of Central Europe. Nonetheless it led people such as Hugo Grotius to write the Law of War and Peace in 1625 to advocate for a creation of a legal framework. In his Prolegomena, he writes that “[f]ully convinced...that there is a common law among nations, which is valid alike for war and in war, ... throughout the Christian world I observed a lack of restraint in relation to war, such as even barbarous nations should be ashamed of” Grotius was deeply affected and influenced by The Thirty Years War, in which a quarter of Europe’s population was killed, and he thus was trying to establish a framework in which disputes among states could be peacefully settled without killing one another for religious reasons.

The Peace Treaty of Westphalia brought to an end a period in which states regularly invaded one another to alter the religious order within that state, and therefore set the foundation for the modern nation-state in which sovereignty plays an essential role. This becomes clear when reading the original document: “And to prevent for the future any Differences arising in the Politick State, all and every one of the Electors, Princes and states of the Roman Empire, are establish'd and confirm'd in their antient Rights, Prerogatives, Libertys, Priviliges, free exercise of Territorial Right, as well Ecclesiastick, as Politick Lordships, Regales, by virtue of this present Transaction: that they never can or ought to be molested therein by any whomsoever upon any manner of pretence.” The peace negotiations were carried out at the Congress of Westphalia between 1644-1648 and the treaty was signed on October, 24 1648 by the Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand II, Swedish and French monarchs. “Its framers believed that they could restore international stability and diplomatic process in a Europe torn by anarchy by eliminating religious divisions as a cause of conflict.”  The Treaty remained in place until the French Revolution, which occurred 142 years later. Most importantly, the predominant form of authority that emerged from the treaty were states and the modern nation-state was build from those states that emerged from the treaty. Although religious conflicts led to the Thirty Years War, they challenged the status quo. While the Holy Roman Empire fragmented into hundreds of small sovereign states, the Swiss Confederation and the Dutch Republic became independent states. Merriman emphasizes that the treaty reinforced the strong autonomous traditions of the German states. The powers of the Church no longer challenged the sovereignty of any state. Every state that signed the Treaty would have their own sovereignty, and people could not interfere with those internal rules. Pope Innocent X condemned the treaties as “null, void, invalid, iniquitous, unjust, damnable, reprobate, inane, empty of meaning and effect for all time.” However that only shows how desperate the Church was when the treaty was finally signed. Eventually the absence of conflicts, in which states invaded one another for religious reasons, contributed to the ascent of nation-states. Figgis describes the Church as an obstacle to the creation of the modern nation-state. “By the destruction of the independence of the Church and its hold on an extra-territorial public opinion, the last obstacle to unity within the state was removed.” Once that obstacle had been removed the times ended in which Europe was embroiled in religious wars, and the time had come where kings and princes would have more authority than religion.

Although the birth of the modern nation-state was a multifaceted event, the argument can clearly be made that religious conflicts contributed more to create the modern nation-state. While other factors such as economics and military played an important role, the event that triggered the birth of the nation-state most was the event that triggered the rise of the sovereign state. The religious conflicts led to the reformation which led to the Thirty Years War which led to the Treaty of Westphalia, which did not explicitly give each state sovereignty because the concept of sovereignty had not been born yet, but it lay the essential foundation for the birth of the nation-state. The Peace Treaty of Westphalia did not necessarily bring peace, but it stopped a period in which states attacked and people killed each other to impose their religious order on one another’s state. Therefore, the correlation between the absence of religious conflicts after the Treaty of Westphalia and the rise and ascent of the modern nation-state is positive. As a result, one cannot ignore the religious conflicts when determining what led to the birth of the modern nation-state.

Bibliography

Darwin, John. (2008) After Tamerlane: The Rise and Fall of Global Empires, 1400-2000. (New York: Penguin, 2008)

Figgis, J.N. (1907) From Gerson to Grotius 1414–1625. 2nd ed. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1916)

Gunn, Steven (2001) ‘War, Religion and State’, in E. Cameron Early Modern Europe (Oxford: Oxford UP)

Grotius, Hugo (1625) On the Law of War and Peace. (Whitefish: Kessinger Publishing, 2004)

Hawker, Sara and Soanes.(2006) Oxford English Dictionary. (Oxford: Oxford UP)

Maland, David (1966) Europe in the Seventeenth Century (London: Macmillan)

Merriman, John.(2004) The History of Modern Europe. (New York: W.W. Norton & Co.)

Seabright, Paul.(2010) The Company of Strangers: a natural history of economic life. (Princeton: Princeton UP)

Tilly, Charles. (1993) Coercion, Capital and European States AD990-1990. (Oxford: Wiley- Blackwell)

The Congress of Westphalia. (1625) The Treaty of Westphalia. Clause LXIV  
Weber, Max. (1905) The Protestant Ethic and Spirit of Capitalist. (London: Routledge, 1985)
