---
layout: post
title:  "Are we witnessing the end of the unipolar moment and the demise of American primacy?"
categories: 
tags: 
---

GV303 From Empire to Globalization 20212 Essay

This essay will defend the hypothesis that the world is witnessing the end of the unipolar moment, but this will not lead to the demise of American primacy. There are two pieces of conventional wisdom pertaining to the debate whether the US is in decline or not. The declinists view sees the US being in relative decline to China, and this being the result of globalization. An alternative view suggests that US power is not in decline, and the US is deriving advantages from globalization and using it to its benefit. The purpose of this essay is then two-fold. In the first part, I will acknowledge that the world is slowly shifting away from a unipolar towards a multipolar world, or a Post-American world as Fareed Zakaria sees it. Historian Niall Ferguson calls this the economic power shift from West to East. An ascending China alone may signal the end of the unipolar moment, and even the crumbling Eurozone may able to challenge US power if it manages to survive its internal problems. I will primarily focus on China. In the second part, I will demonstrate that the United States should not be underestimated as it is now by many declinists, and that it will likely remain in the pole position in the race for globalization. US power may be constrainted, but it will not diminish. Even though there are promising contenders to US power on the horizon, the US for the next decade or two is likely to remain leader of the global world. Therefore, we are witnessing a transformation in the world by which power becomes dispersed, not only between nation-states but also between different stakeholders in society. American primacy is then not in demise, but instead being redefined.

The term unipolar moment refers to the period, immediately following the collapse of the Soviet Union, in which the United States as the unchallenged superpower constituted the center of world power. Declinists emphasize the value of history, and assert that the global economy resembles those of past eras, by which the US will decline just as British power has declined in the 20th century. The likely contender to replace the US as the hegemonic power seems to be China. Kissinger admits that China’s quest for equal partnership with the US is no longer an outsized claim of a vulnerable country given its increasingly financial and economic capacities.

This seems to validate the declinists view, and there is a strong case made that with China catching up, it will be able to challenge US power. Joffe refers to a study by Goldman Sachs, which estimates that the Chinese economy will have overtaken the US as the largest economy by 2050. Goldman Sachs recently lowered this figure to 2027, however. According to Ferguson, we are living through one of the most astonishing shifts there has ever been in the global balance of financial power; the end of an era, stretching back more than a century, when the financial tempo of the world economy was set by English-speakers, first in Britain, then in America. The recent growth in China seems to confirm this trend. The Chinese economy over the past thirty years has grown at an annualized rate of 9-10%. Many argue that America’s fear of China is unwarranted, and they point to Japan, which was predicted to overtake the US. However, the rise of China is much more credible if we consider China more as a continent than as a country. China constitutes one fifth of world population, and is the third largest country by territory. Even if China’s political system might not be regarded as sustainable, its economic machine based on capitalism is functioning. This makes China even more threatening in a way than the Soviet Union, which did not have a functioning economic model. David Li thinks that this trend, which was started by Deng Xiaoping when he opened up and reformed the country, is likely to continue because the new generation of Chinese people are not satisfied with the progress that has been made. China is already asserting influence, and this is testament of the transition that we are witnessing from a unipolar to a multipolar world. China’s rise has lifted millions of people out of poverty, and Li contends that in international relations China is looking for peace and collaboration. This has given hopes to the poor in the world, and China’s model of social and economic institutions gives the world an alternative model to the Western way of governing a country. After the financial crisis, trade patterns were shifted and China discovered that its most dynamic market is its internal one. All this suggests that the unipolar moment is slowly eroding. China is likely to grow in magnitude over the coming decades, and not rely so much on exports but instead develop its own domestic market. For Kissinger the issue is two-fold: how China uses its growing capacities and secondly, whether the US and its allies have the willingness to adjust to the new international environment. This then comes to show that even though the unipolar moment might come to an end, this will not necessarily undermine US power. To Kissinger, the challenge is whether America can redefine itself after its century of progress and similarly how China redefines itself when it absorbs its economic growth. By cooperatively accommodating China into the international system, the US can potentially reaffirm its global leadership. History suggests that a clash between a rising and a stagnating or declining power is not necessarily peaceful, but it is hard to make predictions, especially in a rapidly changing globalized world, on whether China’s rise will precipitate a decline in US power or rather strengthen it.

Even if we take China’s rise as a given over the next few decades, and acknowledge that China will be a credible contender to the US’s status as a superpower, and further discount any other internal problems such as political ones that might stop China’s rapid growth rate, we should still not underestimate the United States. China’s rise does not necessarily mean the demise of American primacy. At the moment, the US remains entangled in one of the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression, and is the largest debtor nation in the history of the world. Moreover, the recent partisan standoff over raising the debt ceiling suggests the American political system is losing the capacity for compromise on basic issues, let alone on large-scale problems. But Winston Churchill once said that the Americans would always do the right thing after having exhausted all the alternatives. There is good evidence to suggest that the US will maintain its leadership position in the world. The United States now formally guarantees the security of more than fifty countries, has fought twice as many wars after the Cold War as during it, and spends 25 percent more on defense today than it did in 1968 at the height of combat in Vietnam. China’s military spending in comparison is miniscule. The World Bank recently calculated that 80 percent of the wealth of the United States is made up of intangible assets, most notably, its system of property rights, its efficient judicial system, and the skills, knowledge, and trust embedded within its society. This is something that declinists often do not price into the relative decline of the US to China. In effect, the United States is more like a sponge, steadily increasing its mass by soaking up ideas, technology, and people from the rest of the world.15 At the moment it seems that the United States’ economic, technological, and military lead over China will remain an enduring feature of international relations, not a passing moment in time. It will be a deeply embedded condition that will persist well into this century. Globalization, then, may not be a neutral process that diffuses wealth evenly throughout the international system, but a political process shaped by the United States in ways that serve its interests. Beckley concludes that the US does not face a hegemonic rival, and the trends favor continued U.S. dominance. Therefore, there are still presently strong indicators, which suggest that despite the rise of China, the US has a good chance of fulfilling the leadership position within that newly designed international architecture.

Most IR theorists did not foresee the end of the Cold War in Eastern Europe, nor the collapse of the Soviet Union, nor the East Asian Crisis, nor Japan’s swift transformation in the 1990s. Therefore, any prediction on whether the US is in decline or not is really hard to make. Will historians look back at the recent global financial crisis as a trigger that shifted economic gravity away from the US, or will it be seen as an opportunity that redefined and rejuvenated America? Only time can tell. For now it seems reasonable to assume that China’s rise will continue, and the US power will endure and not falter.

Bibliography

Beckley, Michael (2011) China’s Century (Cambridge: International Security, 2011)

Cox, Michael (2002) Whatever Happened to American Decline? (London: New Political Economy, 2002)

Cox, Michael (2007) Is the United States in Decline – Again? (Oxford: International Affairs, 2007)

Ferguson, Niall (2008) The Ascent of Money (New York: Penguin, 2008) Ferguson, Niall (2004) Colossus (New York: Penguin, 2011)

Joffe, Josef (2009) The Default Power (New York: Foreign Affairs, 2009) Kissinger, Henry (2011) On China (New York: Penguin, 2011)

Li, David (2011) Does the 21st Century Belong to China? (Toronot: House of Anansi Press, 2011)

Quinn, Adam (2011) The Art of Declining Politely (Oxford: International Affairs, 2011)

Soros, George (2004) The Bubble of American Supremacy (New York: PublicAffairs, 2004)

Zakaria, Fakaria (2009) The Post-American World (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2009)
